>> Richard Feldman: So in this section,
we're gonna talk about Lexing, aka
tokenization, also scanning, I've heard
less commonly, parsing and formatting.
Okay, so we'll start with Lexing.
This is typically what most
compilers will start out with.
You don't have to start out this way, but
it's so common that we're going to do it
in this compiler and just talk
very briefly about how it's done.
So here's the basic idea.
We have some source code here.
Let's say this is our source code.
It says const x = 5.
This is valid source code in our language.
I forgot to mention earlier
we support comments.
And then we have a comment
afterwards that says x = 5.
So the first thing that we're gonna do,
and basically that every compiler does,
is we've got this source code format.
And it is really inconvenient to try
to write a compiler on top of just
source code.
So let's try to get it into some other
representation that is going to make our
lives easier as compiler authors.
So the first thing that we do is
we basically start marching
through the string.
And trying to find interesting they
call them tokens basically little chunks
of text that are sort of
semantically interesting to us,
that we can make a nice tree out of.
Eventually, when we get to parsing,
and then we can traverse that tree and
do our analysis in a much
more nicely semantic way.
So C, O, N, S, T, that's what our lexer
sees and says, I know what that is.
This is a const token.
So this is how we would
represent that in our language.
You just make a JavaScript record object.
By the way, the compiler is going
to be written in JavaScript,
the compiler subset of JavaScript.
So we would have an object here,
and we have a field called type.
And the type is going to
be constant all caps.
The reason I put these in all caps is
just to kind of indicate that like, hey,
these are tokens.
These are not like the actual syntax,
so you can kind of tell when you
see the all caps thing that means,
this is like the name of the token
as opposed to the actual syntax.
We could have named the same thing.
We could have said I am
a const thing whatever.
This is regerring to that but
not actuallly coming from the source.
The value for this is null.
We'll see later on,
actually immediately after this.
Some tokens have a value
associated with them.
For example, this token has a value
of x associated with it and
then position here is basically where in
the original file can this be found like,
in the actual source code.
This comes up for
things like error messages.
If you wanna Print out nice,
helpful error messages to your users.
People generally want to know okay,
but where in the source code is that?
You could be like, I found a Type error.
And you're like, where?
Where was the type error?
You're like, it's a string and
it was supposed to be a number.
You got to guess where.
So, yeah, if you want to be able to
give people nice error messages,
you really got to propagate through
the subsequent steps of compilation where
the actual source code position is.
This is not something I'm
going to show on every slide,
because it gets kind of tedious to
have like position all over the place.
But just keep in mind that in
a real production grade compiler,
we would be basically propagating the
original source code position of things
like all the way through.
Starting from tokenization all the way
through, pretty much the entire pipeline.
Anything that could possibly
give a user an error at compile
time is going to be connected
back to the source code
if you wanna be able to
show them the source code.
All right, so the next token,
our lecture's gonna see it.
It's like, all right,
we got the cons, great.
We parsed pass or sorry, skipped
pass whatever white space was there.
And now we found this thing called X.
It's not a keyword.
It's not equal sign.
It's not a number.
Okay, this must be an identifier.
So identifier is basically
a general term for
something that's sort of
the user came up with it.
So either it could be a variable like
this, or it could be a function argument
name, or it could be a function name,
could even be a field.
Some languages will or will not
have separate tokens for fields and
objects with the colon after them
versus just identifiers outside that.
In our case,
we're not even supporting objects, so
we don't have that problem to think about,
so unlike the const one, this one actually
does have a value because there
are different types of identifiers.
The whole point of them is that they're
sort of coming from user space.
This is something that the user typed in.
They could of put x or y or
z or whatever else you want.
And so we want to store that in our actual
token, but a lot of tokens such as equals,
don't have anything to store so
for those we just say value null.
And notice that the position
keeps moving up, right?
We're now eight characters
into our source code.
Some compilers will store this as
like a line and column numbers.
One reason to do that is that,
well, a that can be nice for
if you're printing out on the command
line, but also that's what like language
server protocol expects is like line and
column numbers.
Unfortunately, it expects them like you
UTF-16 format, which is really annoying
because everybody wants to use UTF-8 for
their source code encoding.
But you also can do it as just as writing
down the index of however many bytes or
characters you are in.
That also works and you can convert
to line and column later on if you
want to just by kind of doing
a very quick rescan for new lines.
Basically, that's what zigs compiler does,
for example.
And then finally, we have a number five.
So this is not an identifier,
although it does come from the user space.
We actually do this is also very common.
Do some sort of analysis to look at the
shape of this user provided thing that's
not a keyword or an equals or whatever.
You're like, okay, wait this looks
like a number literal to us.
So it's useful to us later
on to make that distinction.
So you may have noticed that basically
no programming languages will allow
you to start a variable,
name with a number.
I'm sure there are they exist, but one of
the reasons for this is that it's very,
very convenient.
And also good for performance if
when you're doing the lexing stage,
you can be like, if I see something
that starts with a number.
Great, this is a number.
I don't need to be like, well, wait
a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute.
What might have been, it might have
been a really funky variable name,
let's just hang on.
Really a lot nicer, if you can just go,
yeah, no, that's a number.
I saw I see a digit, it's a number and
then finally, we have a comment.
So a lot of compilers, and
especially teaching compilers we're
building a sort of a toy compiler here.
We'll just discard comments at this
stage and we'll just throw them away.
We are not gonna do that because
we are building a formatter and
if you're building a formatter,
you need to keep the comments.
If you throw them away,
then they don't get formatted,
they just get thrown in the garbage,
which is really bad for a formatter.
But good news, you can just keep them.
So when you are building a compiler that
wants to share code with a formatter.
Lots of formatters have a totally
separate they do their own lexing and
their own parsing or whatever.
But if you want to share code with
your compiler for example, Zig and
Rock both have formatters built
in to the compiler itself.
And it's just like using
exactly the same code.
What they will do is they
will take these comments and
either store them as tokens like this.
And then later on when you're
doing the type checking and
stuff just be like, It's a comment.
Just skip over it, ignore it and
then the format is like, don't skip over.
Actually, I want to keep that or
you can sort of store them out of band.
In other words,
you have this sort of separate array of
like this is where all the comments are.
Here's all the line and count column
numbers of the comments are and
then that way, your analysis stages don't
even see these tokens coming through.
But the formatter has a way to sort
of go out of its way to go get them.
The information's still there, but it's
not necessarily it's in a way that's like
a little bit less convenient for
the formatter, but more convenient for
all the other types of things
that the compiler does.
Okay, which brings us to
the actual concept of formatting.
The basic idea behind formatting is that
we are going to start with some sort of
representation in code,
some sort of structure, and
then go from that structure
back out to string.
So here's an example of
doing this with tokens.
So tokens are a totally
reasonable way to do this, but
we are going to see
another way to do that and
some reasons you might want to do it with
something other than tokens in a second.
But let's just run with tokens for now.
So we've got our const token, and
we're like, okay, we have lexed that or
tokenized that out of
the original source code, and
now we want to being a formatter.
We want to print that back out.
So what string should we print out
when we have this as our token?
Anyone?
C, O, N, S, T, just exactly what we
got in right with a space after it.
So that's it, it's as simple as that.
We got the keyword,
we translated into this format, and
now we're translating it into the output.
And the output, what we want is
to end up with is a .js file.
So it's like, yeah,
I see a C-O-N-S-T, boom,
we're just gonna turn that back
into the source code string,
and just push that onto our running tally
of strings that we're gonna output.
Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: The subtle distinction Here
is we're effectively moving between a type
and the formatting of the type.
Is that fair?
>> Richard Feldman: So I would say
that the main distinction here is that
this is the object that we've created for
ourselves.
And we're just gonna be
iterating over a whole big,
long list of these that we made.
And we made that from the source code but
now that's what we're working with.
So we're no longer looking
at the original source code.
We're just looking at these tokens
that we made, and then for each token,
you basically have a giant switch
statement that's like, okay,
I see that we got a const token.
And then maybe after that we
get the identifier that says x.
We're like, well, I want to put
that back in the source code, so
I'll just stick an X in there, and okay.
And then we get another
token that comes in.
It's like, this is an equals.
Okay, well,
let's take an equals in there, and
you we kind of proceed through all
the tokens that we just grabbed.
And in our big switch statement okay,
now it's the number, it's the number 5,
put it there.
And here's the comment,
put the comment there.
Now that might seem like we
didn't really do anything,
because it's like we had
it in source code string.
And then we turned it into the tokens, and
then we turned the tokens back into
the exactly identical source code string.
What was the point of all that?
Well, of course, if you already have
source code that is precisely formatted
the way the formatter wants to format it,
it doesn't do anything.
And that's kind of desirable.
But if you had a bunch of spaces in here,
the fact that we were able to go through
and grab these tokens and identify like.
This is a const like, and
we got all the space around it and
just discarded the spaces and
kept the token,
and turn this into a token
with all of ther space, etc.
Then we turn those tokens back into this,
hey, it's reformatted.
So this is essentially how the formatter
does its job and provide its value.
[LAUGH] It's just by taking source code,
turn it into tokens, or another
representational we'll see in a second,
and then turning that back into a string.
So now let's talk very briefly
about formatting new lines.
So a thing that I've seen in some
formatters, which I really enjoy,
is in a language that
supports trailing new lines.
A way that you can specify that you would
like the formatter to use a multi-line
versus a single-line style, is by
including or omitting trailing comma.
So in this case,
we have the trailing comma which
is kind of what is usually the accepted
style for multiline JavaScript objects.
And then if you have a single line one,
it would look weird if you had
a trailing comma there after this one.
So if you don't have the trailing comma,
you're signaling to the formatter,
yeah, please format this single line.
And if you do have the trailing comma,
then you're signaling to the formatter,
I want this to be formatted multi line.
Cool, okay.
Now here's the problem.
If we're working in terms of tokens, how
do we know back before we could possibly
have seen the trailing comma,
that it was time to go in multi line mode.
Like in the previous example,
as we went through the tokens,
we were just building up that string,
just one thing after another.
But that wouldn't work well here because
if we did that, we'd be coming along where
like, I see an open curly brace token,
I see an a, I'll put that in there.
I see a 1, I'll put that in there, etc.
Then I come along and
I see this trailing comma no.
I needed way more newlines back there and
indentation that I just totally didn't
do because I didn't know it
until I got later in the tokens.
So a way that you can deal with this
is instead of doing it in terms of
just raw tokens, is you can take the next
step in our compilation pipeline and
turn those tokens into a parse tree.
There's different names to this.
Another common was abstract syntax tree or
AST for short.
I like parse tree because it's
the thing that the parser makes.
So I'm going to use parse tree for
this workshop, but
you ever hear people talking about ASTs or
EPS X abstract syntax trees.
They're talking about parse trees,
same idea.
Okay, so
here is the token representation of this.
So we saw a second ago, I'm going to sort
of like do a little condensed format,
like not write out the entire object,
some sizzle shorthand notation.
So I don't have to try to cram all those
curly braces on the slide, but basically,
it was Const identifier equals number and
comment.
That was the important stuff,
the information that's in the tokens.
Now, if we discard the comment and
then we're like, okay, let's consider
everything but the comment, here is how
that could look in a parse tree node.
So a parse tree is a tree.
The token's just a flat, array.
It's like a long sequence of them but
the whole point of the parse tree is that
you're now representing your
code as an actual tree.
There's nesting going on, and
that nesting is going to be useful for
us when we're trying to figure out
what's multi line and what's not.
So here, we would say,
rather than const and
identifier being two separate
tokens in the parse tree,
we're going to choose to say we have
a type of this parse tree node.
And the type is this is a constant
declaration or ConstDecl for short.
Decl is a very common abbreviation that
you'll see in compilers for short for
declaration 'cause that's a long word.
And then we will have an ID
field that basically says,
this is the particular identifier that
this constant declaration is named.
Then we're gonna have a value for
the constant declaration that's being
basically what comes after the equals, and
this is where the nesting begins.
So at this point,
we basically say everything after
the equals is another parse tree node.
And so in our case, that's going to be
a parser node that's a little bit simpler.
It's just called a type number and
the value of 5.
You can imagine that you could get
this nesting going arbitrarily long.
If you wanted to you could very well
have instead of a number here in like.
Actual JavaScript, you could have
an object which has multiple fields in it,
and then each of those
fields has an array,
and each of those arrays
has another object.
You could get the nesting really,
really deep here.
But the point is that no matter
how deep the nesting gets,
you do actually get to keep
that structure in memory.
You do actually get to traverse this and
manipulate it however you want,
whereas the tokens are really not
conducive to that kind of nesting.
The tokens are just a flat array.
And so if we want to do the type
of analysis that we're doing with
the multiline or not,
it's much more convenient to have it in
a tree form than to have it in the like.
I have a big flat array and if I get to
a point and realize I've made a mistake, I
have to know exactly where in the array to
jump back to be able to do analysis, okay.
So this is our parse tree node.
And basically this is a good
answer to the question of, like,
how do we know back here that
we wanted to do multi line mode?
So essentially, what you can do is, if you
want to be keeping this metadata around,
just like we did with the comments.
You can just record that in the parse
tree node, like as you're going along and
seeing the tokens, you start off
with is multi-line false by default.
And then as soon as you hit this
trailing comma, you're like, well,
I'm in the middle of this node.
I'll just flip that to true and
we're all set.
And now that's just a very,
very quick, easy operation to do.
You don't need to do any
backtracking at all.
And then later when you come through and
traverse the parse tree,
instead of traversing the tokens
to do your formatting.
Now you just have that right there on
the node right when you encounter it.
So essentially the pipeline
that we built up to here,
originally we had our source string and
then we converted it to tokens.
Then we took our tokens and
coverted that to a parse tree.
So notice that when we made the parse
tree, we just look at the tokens.
We didn't need to go all the way
back to the source string.
We were able to just say like, well,
I can translate this concert
followed by this identifier.
Followed by this yadda, yadda directly
into the parse tree node without having to
go ask the source string for any info.
And then finally, we can go from
the parse tree to the output string and
then when you've completed
our formatting job.
This is a theme that we're going to see
throughout the workshop of you got your
input and you turn that into an output.
And then you take that previous output and
use that as the input to the next thing.
And then that output turns into a
different output, and so on and so forth.
This thing happens to be called lexing or
tokenization, or
I've occasionally heard scanning.
This is usually called parsing.
That's pretty much the common name for
this and this is often called code gen,
short for code generation.
And again you'll find this in all
sorts of different compilers.
It's not only a theme in this course that
we're going to be doing all these like
translating from one intermediate
representation to another.
This is also how modern compilers do it.
Production grade compilers do it very,
very common.
Now let's just go indulge
me in a small tangent.
Let's say we built our formatter, and
we've decided we're going to go
a little bit rogue with our formatter.
We're going to do something that
formatters are not supposed to do.
We've decided to do it anyway.
Our format is going to
introduce syntax sugar.
So we're basically saying, not only is
this a formatter for JavaScript, but
also, if you want x+++,
not enough, we want x+++ support,
so you can have three
pluses in this formatter.
Is it a formatter still?
Who knows, but we decided to do this.
Let's indulge me and pretend we
decided we want our formatter to allow
you to write x+++ and it'll accept it.
So here will be the tokens we would see
if we were scanning along, we see, okay,
there's the identifier x, there's
PLUS there's PLUS and another PLUS.
Then we would translate that
into a node in the parse tree.
Now we could just make up a new
parse tree node for this.
We could say every time I see
this combination of tokens,
I'm going to make a new parse tree
node that's called PlusPlusPlus.
And it stores the identifier that's
doing the plus, plus, plus on, and
that's how it works.
We could do that.
And at that point, we could say,
well, I can take my parse tree and
just do co generation on that parse tree
to output string, just like I did before.
And instead of just having my giant switch
statement that's got, my const decals and
whatnot, I just add one more case to it,
saying okay.
If I see one of these PlusPlusPlus things,
then I'm gonna put that
in the output string.
But of course, you can't put x+++ directly
into the output string because that's not
a thing in JavaScript and if you did that,
you would have broken JavaScript.
That's why it's syntax sugar.
What we can do is we can just say, well,
no, I'm just I'm not going to put x+++
out whenever I see one of these nodes,
I'm just going to emit this in my format.
I'm going to just write out the output.
JavaScript is going to x = x +2.
Now at this point,
we're not formatter anymore.
We are doing more than just
formatting your source code.
We are actually allowing
new forms of syntax and
then emitting something that's different
from that, not just in formatting, but
it actually just is something different.
We've basically now
turned into a transpiler.
Now here's the interesting thing,
that's not a big change.
Almost all of the work that we're
doing here is exactly the same.
We just added like one more case to the
stage of going from tokens to parse tree.
And then we added one case to going
from parse tree to output string and
suddenly we're a transpiler.
So this is why I wanted to
start off with formatting.
You might think that like making
a transpiler is like a big, scary whoa,
that's like a huge project.
It's like not that much
bigger than a format.
Formatter is not that big of a project
like you now know everything you know need
to know to make syntax sugar
in whatever language you know.
It's just that's it.
You can make a formatter, and
making a formatter isn't that much harder
than just like doing the like lexing and
parsing stuff.
Then you can make a transpiler, as long as
you're okay with only doing syntax sugar.
And you might think, well,
who would bother to do that?
Well, let me tell you about language
called coffee script, which at one point
was the 11th most popular language on
Github at the peak of its popularity.
Which was granted a very small
single digit number of year window.
But this was the kind of
stuff that Coffeescript did.
It was basically like a language that
compiled to Javascript without really
changing the semantics.
Mostly it just had different syntax and
you can go look at the copy of source
code, and
you're gonna see this same kind of stuff.
It really doesn't look a whole
lot different than a formatter in
a lot of ways.
Just doing some syntax, sure.
Okay, so I mentioned that this is
gonna be a theme in the course, and
I wanna emphasize this again,
like traversing the input and
generating output is something
that compilers love to do.
Source string to tokens, tokens,
parse tree, parse tree to output string,
lexing, parsing code gen this
is what we're doing right now.
And over the course of the workshop, we're
going to add more and more steps in here,
like we're going to get some
name resolution in there.
We're going to get some
type checking in there,
multiple different stages of
analysis at the end of the day,
that's pretty much what
they're all doing is like.
Just take some source in
Intermediate representation and
create another one along the way, and at
the end of the day, you get your output.
Okay, so to summarize all the stuff
we talked about in part one,
we start off by talking about lexing,
which is where you start off with
your raw input source code, string.
And you output tokens,
also known as tokenization or scanning.
We talked about parsing, which is where
you create your parse tree nodes or.
Also known as abstract syntax
tree nodes or AST nodes and
this is where you're starting with the
tokens that you got in the previous step
rather than going to the source code.
You're disregarding the source code at
this point, but you are still threading
through that position so
that when you give the error messages.
You're still able to connect it all
the way back to the original source code.
And then we talked about formatting where
your input is the parse tree node or
as we saw, depending on your design,
you may or may not have a need for
the parseTreeNode information.
Maybe you can just do it with tokens.
And then you're outputting
the actual string.